www.ssoar.info
Intergenerational Dynamics among Russian-
Speaking Anti-War and Pro-Democracy Activists in
Germany
Golova, Tatiana; Selivanova, Galina
Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version
Zeitschriftenartikel / journal article
Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:
Golova, T., & Selivanova, G. (2024). Intergenerational Dynamics among Russian-Speaking Anti-War and Pro-
Democracy Activists in Germany. Russian Analytical Digest , 316, 19-23. https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000692533
Nutzungsbedingungen:
Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY-NC-ND Lizenz
(Namensnennung-Nicht-kommerziell-Keine Bearbeitung) zur
Verfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC-Lizenzen finden
Sie hier:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/deed.deTerms of use:
This document is made available under a CC BY-NC-ND Licence
(Attribution-Non Comercial-NoDerivatives). For more Information
see:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
Diese Version ist zitierbar unter / This version is citable under:
https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-101582-8
RUSSIAN ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 316, 10 September 202419
ANALYSIS
Intergenerational Dynamics among Russian-Speaking Anti-War and 
Pro-Democracy Activists in Germany
Tatiana Golova, ZOiS and Galina Selivanova, FernUniversity in Hagen
DOI: 10.3929/ethz-b-000692533
Abstract
This essay examines anti-war and pro-democracy activism among migrants who associate themselves with 
Russia, exploring activism dynamics, various issue fields, and audiences. The study is based on qualitative 
interviews with migrants-turned-activists and activists-turned-migrants in Germany. While they share broad 
pro-Ukrainian and anti-regime orientations, they exhibit differences in political vocabulary, practices, and 
backgrounds. We focus on four distinct fields: transnational human rights activism, migration assistance, 
adaptation assistance, and humanitarian support for Ukraine. We discuss challenges related to long-term 
collaboration and the development of inclusive political organizations, which are partially caused by the dif -
ferences in migration experience and the resources available to migrants of different generations.
1 This study relies on and extends the research project “Political Migration from Russia and Azerbaijan,” https://www.zois-berlin.de/en/research/
research-clusters/migration-and-diversity/political-migration-from-russia-and-azerbaijan .Migration and Activism Among Russian 
Migrants in Germany
Russian-speaking migrants make up one of the largest 
linguistic minorities in Germany. Germany has seen 
several waves of migration from the countries of the 
former Soviet Union (FSU), including Russia, with 
Russian-German “late resettlers” and Russian-Jewish 
“quota refugees” being the largest categories. Since the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, Germany has continued 
to attract a diverse range of migrants, including skilled 
workers, students, refugees, and those arriving through 
family reunification. According to the Federal Statisti -
cal Office of Germany, the number of residents hold -
ing only a Russian passport, without German or EU 
citizenship, increased by 33% between 2011 and 2020, 
with such individuals now representing 2.2% of the 
foreign population. The number of first- and second-
generation immigrants from Russia totals 1.35 million 
people, according to the 2023 microcensus ( https://
www.destatis.de/ ). People in this broad category have 
diverse experiences, political orientations, and access 
to political rights and therefore demonstrate different 
patterns of social, economic, and political integration; 
some of them maintain strong cultural and linguis -
tic ties to their homeland, a pattern that is often com -
bined with a sense of otherness (Panagiotidis 2022).
Following Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 
February 2022 and the subsequent increase in repression 
within Russia, thousands of civic and political activists 
fled the country, with some receiving temporary protec -
tion status in Germany. This period also saw a signifi -
cant rise in activism among Russian-speaking groups in 
Germany, which have pursued diverse agendas ranging from pro-Kremlin to anti-Putin and anti-war. Some of 
the anti-war and pro-democracy groups, which are the 
focus of this investigation, had formed a few years before 
the invasion and were spurred to action by the moral 
shock of the full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
This essay examines activism among different gener -
ations of migrants who associate themselves with Russia, 
exploring the dynamics of activism, various issue fields, 
and the audiences that activists target. We discuss how 
different generations of activists engage in distinct forms 
of transnational activism, then turn to analyze humani -
tarian visas and migration assistance. Finally, we dis -
cuss issues related to the adaptation of new migrants 
and community-building. Our interviewees represent 
various groups involved in pro-Ukrainian and anti-war 
activism, therefore the topic of Russia’s war in Ukraine 
was raised frequently during the interviews. The selected 
diverse and highly relevant fields of activism mentioned 
in the interviews illustrate the evolving dynamics of 
activism across different generations of migrants. The 
sample consists of interviews with 13 respondents who 
arrived before the full-scale invasion of Ukraine and 16 
who arrived afterwards. We spoke with several inter -
viewees more than once. All interviews were conducted 
between July 2022 and August 2024.1
Dynamics: Migrants-Turned-Activists and 
Activists-Turned-Migrants
As of 2024, among the Russian anti-war and pro-democ -
racy activists in Germany are both activists-turned-
migrants and migrants-turned-activists (Piper 2009). 
Due to longstanding cooperation between Russian and 
German actors in the sphere of civil society, on the one 
RUSSIAN ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 316, 10 September 202420
hand, and academic and cultural fields, on the other 
hand, Germany has long been a destination for politi -
cal migrants from Russia, particularly since the decline 
of the pro-democracy mobilization of 2011–2012 and 
the tightening of the political regime. Following Rus -
sia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine and the subsequent 
totalitarian shift in Russia’s domestic political landscape, 
including the closure of the most remaining free pub -
lic arenas, many civil society actors moved to Germany. 
This led to the emergence of a visible, war-induced wave 
of activists-turned-migrants who constitute a new gener -
ation in terms of shared migration and political experi -
ences. In Germany, they have encountered “earlier gen -
erations,” i.e., initiatives and groups involving political 
migrants who arrived before the full-scale invasion, as 
well as larger groups of migrants-turned-activists—indi -
viduals who had no experience in social and political 
activism prior to leaving Russia. Similar to developments 
in other European countries, “reactive” politicization, 
the founding of new initiatives, and transregional net -
working among migrants-turned-activists were triggered 
by Alexey Navalny’s return to Russia after his poisoning 
and recovery, as well as the related protests in Russia in 
2021. The Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 
became another critical juncture that triggered mobili -
zation. Among the “new” migrants-turned-activists, the 
continuation or discontinuation of engagement varies 
depending on their resources, networks, and prepared -
ness for migration, ranging from a smooth transition 
to activism to complete retirement (see Fomina 2021).
The complex interplay between migration and 
engagement trajectories that we observe is crucial for 
understanding the organizational and mobilizational 
potential of the diverse group of Russian migrants in 
Germany involved in anti-war activities. One might 
expect that migrants from different waves would 
bring diverse skill sets to the development of shared 
projects benefiting all migrant groups from Russia 
and other former Soviet Union states. However, as 
pointed out by Darieva and Golova (2023), “dispar -
ities and inequalities in terms of social and cultural 
capital between activists who have lived in Germany 
longer and newer political migrants make coopera -
tion and integration into existing initiatives challen -
ging.” Earlier arrivals typically possess stronger lan -
guage skills and broader social networks in the host 
country, while those who have recently arrived from 
Russia have a deeper understanding of the current 
Russian social and political context. Our observations, 
particularly outside of Berlin, indicate that activists 
from different generations rarely develop strong and 
deep collaboration; interactions are usually limited 
2 See the “Faces of Russian Resistance” website, https://www.politzk.com/en .to co-participation in occasional events or short-term 
projects. Organizations rooted in Russian-speaking 
communities tend to involve migrants-turned-activ -
ists, who primarily invite newer political migrants to 
participate in existing projects. By contrast, activists-
turned-migrants often prefer to conduct their initia -
tives in parallel to those of established Russian-speak -
ing organizations.
Cooperation Patterns in Different Fields of 
Activism
 
Field 1: Transnational Connections and Human Rights 
Activism
The transnational connections and interactions 
between migrants of different generations are reflected 
in advocacy efforts for political prisoners in Russia 
and other awareness-raising campaigns. In contrast, 
assistance to Russians who refuse to serve in the Rus -
sian army during the war against Ukraine serves as 
a striking example of transnational activism predom -
inantly driven by activists from the more recent wave 
of migration.
The first area of focus is activism and advocacy sur -
rounding political prisoners in Russia. This issue is 
equally significant to both migrants-turned-activists 
from earlier waves of migration and activists-turned-
migrants from more recent waves. Migrants from dif -
ferent generations have launched transnational cam -
paigns aimed at raising awareness and mobilizing 
support for Russian political prisoners. For instance, 
left-wing activists support and advocate for their com -
rades in Russian prisons. Another example is an exhi -
bition entitled “Faces of Russian Resistance,” which has 
been displayed in 29 cities worldwide.2 Developed by 
Russian political exiles based across Europe, this exhi -
bition highlights political persecution and supports 
those in Russia who oppose the war. It has brought 
together activists from different generations, who pool 
resources to organize and promote the event. Aimed 
primarily at the local populations, the exhibition is 
part of broader efforts by Russian migrant commu -
nities to inform the public about political prisoners in 
Russia. In general, local organizations within Russian 
migrant communities consciously focus on the Ger -
man public sphere, seeing this as the primary audience 
of their campaigns.
Another case of shared activism involves writing 
letters to political prisoners. Such low-cost, low-effort 
campaigns are organized sporadically by migrants 
from different waves and require minimal resources 
or preparation. Letter-writing evenings take place reg -
RUSSIAN ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 316, 10 September 202421
ularly in different cities across Germany and offer 
opportunities to meet and engage with like-minded 
activists.
A further instance of transnational activism is 
advocacy and support for conscientious objectors 
who refuse to serve in the Russian army and fight in 
the war against Ukraine. While migrants from earlier 
waves are less involved in this area, it is heavily sup -
ported by Russian human rights activists, many of 
whom were forced to relocate abroad after the begin -
ning of the invasion. Engagement in this field does not 
require strong ties with local politicians in German 
cities or migrants of earlier generations. Such polit -
icized humanitarian activism can be carried out by 
experts who operate from locations outside of Russia, 
using their skills, knowledge, and personal networks 
to advocate in political centers such as Berlin, Paris, 
and Brussels.
Field 2: Humanitarian Visas and Migration Assistance
Another area where Russian migrant activists collab -
orate transnationally, as well as with German and other 
European officials, politicians, and civil society actors, 
is in providing migration assistance to activists and 
others at risk of political persecution in Russia, such 
as LGBTQ+ persons. Of the two main aspects to this 
work—helping people flee Russia and securing legal 
entry to a safe country—the latter is particularly rele -
vant to the German context. In the critical situation of 
spring 2022, Germany introduced a list-based proce -
dure for issuing humanitarian visas under section 22, 
sentence 2, of the Residence Act for certain profiles of 
Russian civil society actors at risk, allowing broader 
admission. Networks that advocated for the intro -
duction of such humanitarian solutions as a reaction 
to further totalitarian shifts in Russia included pol -
iticians, activists, and German NGO actors, among 
them those with Russian migration backgrounds and 
solid transnational expertise. Many had already coop -
erated with the German Federal Foreign Office, for 
example through the Eastern Partnership program, 
and were entrusted with the initial verification of 
applicant cases and the preparation of lists for fur -
ther review by German authorities—an acknowledg -
ment of their expertise on Russia and their well-devel -
oped networks. Initially, migrants from earlier waves, 
mostly migrants-turned-activists, were at the forefront 
of such “legalization assistance,” but as more new -
comers became involved as volunteers, this migrants-
for-migrants activism expanded as a form of solidar -
ity with anti-war activists in Russia. Some Russian 
migrant NGOs offer letters of support for humani -
tarian visa applicants confirming their contacts with 
German society.Field 3: Adaptation of New Migrants and 
Community-Building
New political migrants are confronted with various, 
sometimes contradictory expectations from German 
society and its political elites, both on a discursive and 
institutional level. As political subjects, they are expected 
to exercise their agency and work relentlessly against the 
Putin regime (an expectation that is particularly pro -
nounced for beneficiaries of the humanitarian visa proce -
dure), while as new migrants they are expected to make 
serious efforts to integrate culturally and economically. 
Specific challenges depend heavily on an individual’s 
legal status and migration path. For example, holders 
of a humanitarian visa and a corresponding residence 
permit are not confronted with the uncertainties of the 
asylum procedure. However, as long as they remain 
dependent on the welfare system, they are required 
to participate in the geographical distribution proc -
ess, which often relocates them to remote areas where 
there are no relevant political communities, whether 
migrant or non-migrant. Their mobility is restricted 
by social transfer regulations and financial limitations, 
which hinder transregional networking and participa -
tion in street actions.
Newly arrived activists-turned-migrants face 
multiple challenges navigating the host country, par -
ticularly because their migration was neither planned 
nor prepared. While they may seek assistance through 
contacts with individuals, such support is rarely for -
malized as a standard service offered by migrant 
organizations. Among urban centers with visible pro-
democratic Russian communities—Berlin, Cologne-
Düsseldorf, and Munich—only Berlin, with its high 
number of migrants and diverse landscape of initia -
tives, has offered regular online and offline network -
ing and consultation events that bring together “old” 
and “new” political migrants. New migrants often rely 
on information and support from those with similar 
experiences, such as leaving Russia after the full-scale 
invasion under the threat of persecution, applying for 
humanitarian visas, and engaging in comparable forms 
of political activism before migration. The exchange of 
tips among newcomers on navigating German bureauc -
racy may not always be effective at achieving the desired 
outcomes, due to a lack of broader knowledge of the 
bureaucratic system beyond the specific cases or lim -
ited German language skills. Nonetheless, these com -
munication practices facilitate community-building 
and reduce feelings of insecurity and isolation among 
the newcomers.
The focus on shared experiences fosters solidarity 
and a sense of We-ness, but these do not necessarily 
translate into politicized activism or the formation of 
political organizations in Germany. For example, sev -
RUSSIAN ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 316, 10 September 202422
eral (former) municipal deputies mentioned that they 
receive support mostly from a network of Russian 
municipal deputies in exile. Their online-based sup -
port group comprises individuals with similar back -
grounds and experiences. While such groups are often 
based on locally focused chats to facilitate network -
ing, they do not evolve into collective political action 
in the host country. In the case of municipal deputies 
in exile, the organization Deputies of Peaceful Russia 
brings together individuals who credibly claim to rep -
resent some anti-war Russians. However, despite their 
shared anti-war stance and public recognition of Rus -
sia’s responsibility for the war, differing political com -
mitments and ideological positions on key issues—such 
as sanctions and reparations—hinder their ability to 
collaborate consistently.
Field 4: The Russo-Ukrainian War as a Focus of Activism
During interviews, the war in Ukraine emerged as 
a central topic, repeatedly being brought up by activ -
ists of different generations. Actions reflecting pro-
Ukrainian and anti-war stances range from the pro -
vision of humanitarian assistance to Ukrainians to 
rallies with pro-Ukrainian agendas such as advocating 
for the delivery of weapons to Ukraine. Humanitar -
ian engagement of both migrants-turned-activists and 
activists-turned-migrants is often depoliticized, seen 
more as a “duty” and “responsibility” of Russians in 
light of the wrongdoings of their country. Such activ -
ism manifests itself differently between generations of 
activists and depending on their resources: those with 
language skills can assist refugees as mediators with 
public administration, while more recent migrants 
may engage in labor-intensive work in warehouses 
handling humanitarian aid, provide “social services,” 
or assist with evacuation. Activists also organize dona -
tion collection and share calls for donations issued by 
other groups to support various initiatives in Ukraine. 
Unlike politics, humanitarian assistance remains a less 
controversial area of cooperation with Ukrainians.
Russian migrants involved in pro-democratic and 
anti-war initiatives often participate in demonstrations 
and rallies organized by Ukrainian organizations, but 
only in their personal capacity. Cooperation between 
Ukrainian and Russian groups was curtailed by the 
Ukrainian side as early as spring 2022. This resulted 
from the brutal Russian war against Ukraine, the wider 
Russian imperial tradition, and the reproduction of 
a “colonial attitude” by parts of the Russian opposi -
tion in exile. A distinct type of street action where 
cooperation is still possible is counter-demonstrations 
against pro-Kremlin—or effectively anti-Ukrainian—
events. They unmask slogans that allegedly promote peace but carry a pro-war meaning. Here, participants 
with Russian migration background challenge both 
the concept of “Russians” as supporters of the war and 
the Kremlin’s symbolic power to define what it means 
to be “Russian.”
Conclusion
This essay explores the diverse experiences and forms of 
activism among Russian-speaking migrants in Germany, 
demonstrating how different waves of migration have 
shaped various pro-Ukrainian and anti-war political 
and humanitarian efforts. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 
has significantly mobilized activism within established 
Russian-speaking groups, while recent waves of anti-
war activists and experts have introduced fresh perspec -
tives and new agendas to the landscape of existing ini -
tiatives. However, the study also reveals challenges in 
developing deep collaboration between older and newer 
migrant generations.
Although these groups share a common origin, their 
integration into German society and involvement in 
activism are shaped by distinct migration experiences. 
For instance, in the realm of transnational activism, 
a division of labor is evident: while solidarity campaigns 
for Russia’s political prisoners attract participants from 
various generations, support for conscientious objectors 
is primarily led by recent migrants, whereas migration 
assistance is driven mainly by migrants-turned-activists, 
with recent migrants contributing mostly as volunteers.
The field of new migrants’ adaptation is grounded in 
the shared experiences of recent migrants but does not 
typically evolve into the formation of political organiza -
tions. While long-term residents involved in pro-democ -
racy and anti-war initiatives are sympathetic to the goal 
of community-building, their focus areas differ, and 
their capacity to assist with adaptation is somewhat lim -
ited. Finally, although the specific forms of pro-Ukrain -
ian humanitarian engagement vary between generations 
of activists based on their resources, this field remains 
a central focus for both recent arrivals and more estab -
lished migrants.
Different generations of Russian anti-war migrant 
activists face the challenge of navigating the contrasts 
between “Russian oppositional” and “German” dis -
cursive opportunity structures—particularly regard -
ing what is considered an acceptable anti-war position. 
For newly arrived activists, maintaining connections 
with fellow activists and non-supporters of the war in 
Russia remains crucial, with many still identifying as 
Russian activists in exile or “on a long-term assign -
ment abroad.”
Challenges related to integration and the differences 
in resources available to various migrant groups com -
RUSSIAN ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 316, 10 September 202423
plicate long-term collaboration and the development of 
inclusive political organizations. The advancement of 
flexible and inclusive structures that respect and accom -modate disparities in resources and audiences, while still 
sharing a fundamental anti-Putin and anti-war stance, 
may be more effective than striving for uniformity.
About the Authors
Dr. Tatiana Golova  is a sociologist and researcher at the Centre of East European and International Studies (ZOiS) 
in Berlin).
Dr. Galina Selivanova is a researcher at FernUniversität in Hagen and an associate researcher at the Forum Interna -
tionale Wissenschaft, University of Bonn.
Further Reading
• Darieva, Tsypylma, and Tatiana Golova. 2023. “Russian Migrants in Georgia and Germany: Activism in the Con -
text of Russia’s War Against Ukraine.” ZOiS  Report no. 3. Accessed September 4, 2024. https://www.zois-berlin.
de/fileadmin/media/Dateien/3-Publikationen/ZOiS_Reports/2023/ZOiS_Report_3_2023.pdf .
• Fomina, Joanna. 2021. Political Dissent and Democratic Remittances: The Activities of Russian Migrants in Europe . 
London: Routledge.
• Panagiotidis, Jannis. 2022. Postsowjetische Migration in Deutschland. Eine Einführung.  Bonn: Bpb.
• Piper, Nicola. 2009. “Temporary Migration and Political Remittances: The Role of Organisational Networks in 
the Transnationalisation of Human Rights.” European Journal of East Asian Studies 8, no. 2: 215–243.