www.ssoar.info
From Merkel to Kramp‐Karrenbauer: Can German
Christian Democracy Reinvent Itself?
Dostal, Jörg Michael
Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version
Zeitschriftenartikel / journal article
Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:
Dostal, J. M. (2019). From Merkel to Kramp‐Karrenbauer: Can German Christian Democracy Reinvent Itself? The
Political Quarterly , 90(2), 286-296. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-923X.12680
Nutzungsbedingungen:
Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY Lizenz (Namensnennung) zur
Verfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC-Lizenzen finden
Sie hier:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.deTerms of use:
This document is made available under a CC BY Licence
(Attribution). For more Information see:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
Diese Version ist zitierbar unter / This version is citable under:
https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-69731-0
From Merkel to Kramp-Karrenbauer: Can
German Christian Democracy Reinvent Itself?
J€ORG MICHAEL DOSTAL
Abstract
Germany ’s Christian Democrats have started preparing for the time after Angela Merkel.
After ten years as German chancellor facing a weak opposition, Merkel unexpectedly splitthe country in late 2015 and early 2016 because of her ‘open border ’policies that allowed
more than 1 million refugees and migrants to rapidly enter Germany. Her management of
the subsequent crisis was largely considered a failure and her party suffered a series of dra-matic election defeats. Reacting to the negative electoral feedback, and in particular thebreakthrough of the rightist and anti-immigration Alternative for Germany (AfD), the Chris-
tian Democratic Union organised an intra-party contest to replace Merkel as party leader.
Three candidates with different political pro ﬁles, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Friedrich
Merz and Jens Spahn, contested the election. By voting for Kramp-Karrenbauer, the CDU
membership voiced support for maintaining a large-scale political coalition based on efforts
toﬁnd compromises between different party wings and social and cultural interests.
Keywords : Angela Merkel, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Christian Democratic Union
(CDU), Germany, Friedrich Merz, Jens Spahn
Introduction
IN THE twenty- ﬁrst century, German politics
has been transformed. The German polity isnow characterised by deep cultural, social
and political divisions. Two chronic policy-
making con ﬂicts have jointly undermined an
earlier more consensus-driven political cul-
ture. These are ﬁrstly the social welfare
retrenchments that were enacted between2003 and 2005 by the then ‘red-green ’Social
Democratic and Green Party coalition gov-
ernment; and secondly the decision of Ger-many ’s Chancellor Angela Merkel (CDU) to
allow refugees and migrants to enter the
country in late 2015 and early 2016, which
resulted in the rapid in ﬂux of more than 1
million people from African and Asian
countries into Germany.
In the larger context of socio-economic
change and growing social inequality, these
two political cleavages have jointly under-
mined the electoral appeal of the traditionalGerman ‘catch-all ’or‘people ’s parties ’, the
centre-right Christian Democrats (CDU/
CSU) and the centre-left Social Democrats(SPD). In the last federal election of 2017, the
former achieved 32.9 per cent and the latter20.5 per cent of the national vote, their sec-
ond-worst and worst result ever in the
history of the Federal Republic. Their subse-quent reluctant forming of a ‘grand coalition ’
government in March 2018 (the term appears
hardly appropriate any longer since bothparties barely assemble a majority in parlia-
ment) raises the question as to whether Ger-
many will follow most other EU countries inexperiencing an increasingly fragmented andweak party system.
This article takes up the case of the German
Christian Democrats (CDU), still the largestcentre-right party in a core EU country, and
asks how it plans to reorganise its political
strategy in what will soon be the post-Merkelera.
1In particular, how will the CDU manage
the transition away from Merkel to a new
party leadership and, directly related, how isthe party going to react to political challengesfrom right-wing populists (the Alternative for
Germany (AfD) party), on the one hand, and
competing centrist political forces (the Greensand the SPD) on the other?The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2, April –June 2019
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA286

In what follows, Merkel ’s successful polit-
ical past between 2005 and 2015 is brie ﬂy
sketched. Next, the two central Germanpolitical cleavages (welfare, and refugees
and migration) are examined in order to
provide some background to better under-stand the behaviour of Merkel and her
party in recent times. Thirdly, Merkel ’s refu-
gee and migration policies since September2015 and the ensuing backlash are dis-
cussed. The fourth section examines how
the CDU reacted to Merkel ’s decline in
popularity and how her resignation asparty leader was prepared. The ﬁfth section
describes the subsequent contest, in early
December 2018, between centrist AnnegretKramp-Karrenbauer and two more conser-
vative candidates, Friedrich Merz and Jens
Spahn. Finally, the conclusion analyses thefuture political opportunity structure for the
CDU in Germany ’s by now well-established
six party system: will the CDU be able toreinvent itself under the new leadership of
Kramp-Karrenbauer?
Merkel ’s successful past
(2005 –2015)
For most of Merkel ’s chancellorship since
2005, observers have argued that her leader-
ship pushed the CDU ﬁrmly to the centre
ground of German politics. During her time
in ofﬁce, she was credited with taking over
many policies of her electoral competitors —
the SPD and the Greens, in particular —while
‘modernising ’her own party in parallel.
Crucially, when Merkel became chancellor in
2005, she abandoned the radical welfareretrenchment of the previous SPD and Green
Party coalition government in favour of
a return to small-step and incremental poli-cies. Her economic policies were centrist,
essentially going with the ﬂow of events.
She abandoned ‘ideological neoliberalism ’in
favour of a more accommodating style,
which also included re-regulatory policies on
numerous occasions.
During her chancellorship, pensions were
atﬁrst retrenched. Later on, policy delibera-
tion started to focus on how to compensate
disadvantaged groups and some minorcountervailing measures were enacted. After
lengthy debate, a statutory minimum wagewas introduced in 2015. There were various
rounds of ‘rescuing ’public and private
banks and efforts to stabilise the euro cur-rency zone, none of these measures being in
line with supply-side economics or neoliberal
doctrine. Going against the general patternof slow decision making, but not against the
general logic of her understanding of policy
making, Merkel moved quickly after theFukushima nuclear disaster in Japan in 2011
to commit Germany to abandoning nuclear
energy at some future point. This new pol-icy, the exact opposite of her previouscourse, was subsequently termed ‘energy
transition ’(Energiewende ). In order to estab-
lish her party, and herself, as the naturalcentre of German politics, coalition with all
relevant competitors (namely the SPD, anti-
nuclear Greens and Liberals) had to be possi-ble at any point. In a similar context, the
CDU ’s pro ﬁle on socio-cultural issues shifted
from conservative to liberal and progressivevalues. In particular, the party accepted
same-sex partnerships, expansion of public
childcare, the ideal of dual earner house-holds, and dual nationality and citizenshipoffers for certain categories of migrants.
Before being taken up by the Merkel-CDU,
these policies had initially been advanced byelectoral competitors.
Analysts have therefore described Mer-
kel’s general approach between 2005 and
2015 as ‘calculated demobilisation ’based on
‘reduced party competition ’and an ‘elec-
toral campaigning avoidance strategy ’.
2
While conservative Merkel critics argued
that she had turned the CDU into an empty
shell devoid of any clear policy commit-ments, her admirers instead praised her for-mula for electoral success: occupying the
political centre ground by borrowing poli-
cies from centrist competitors, and policymaking based on consultation and incre-
mentalism. During her ‘grand coalitions ’
with the SPD (2005 –2009, 2013 –2017, and
again since March 2018) and her single spell
as leader of a centre-right coalition with the
Liberals (FDP) between 2009 and 2013, Mer-kel pro ﬁted to a large extent from demobil-
ising mistakes of her coalition partners.
After each electoral cycle, Merkel ’s political
partners suffered electoral defeat while herCDU maintained the role of the natural
party of government.
CANGERMAN CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY REINVENT ITSELF ? 287
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019 The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2
During the Merkel era, a general increase
in social inequality occurred. The workingand middle classes experienced stagnant ordeclining wages, while deregulated service
work with low job security expanded.
3
Between the 2005 and 2009 federal elections,
electoral participation declined by around 7
per cent —mostly demoralised former SPD
voters—before recovering in the 2017 elec-
tions when the AfD managed to mobilise
large numbers of former non-voters. More-
over, the share of the vote of ‘wing ’parties
opposing Merkel on the left and right side ofthe political spectrum (the Left Party and the
AfD) expanded. Crucially, calculated demo-
bilisation during the Merkel chancellorshiphad a strong social class dimension: voters
with lower socio-economic positions (un-
skilled and skilled blue collar workers andthe urban poor) have increasingly turned
away from participating in elections alto-
gether or, more recently, have switched tovote for the rightist AfD party.
4
While observers continue to disagree
about the exact ingredients of Merkel ’s past
success formula, the date when her fortunesturned will likely be agreed to have been the
3 September 2015. On this day, Merkel
decided to allow refugees and migrantswaiting in Hungary to enter Germany. Her
decision subsequently set in motion a large-
scale population movement of more than 1million refugees and migrants into Germany
in late 2015 and early 2016. This policy deci-
sion immediately turned her from a repre-sentative of consensus into the most
polarising politician in her own country and
far beyond.
Germany ’s two chronic policy-
making con ﬂicts
To begin with, the post-2003 welfare retrench-
ment and labour market deregulation (so-called ‘Hartz reforms ’), enacted under the for-
mer chancellor Gerhard Schr €oder (SPD), was
jointly passed in parliament by SPD, Greensand the then CDU/CSU opposition. Thisoccurred at a moment in time when neoliberal
political ideas —deregulation, privatisation
and growing acceptance of social inequality —
had captured the imagination of Germany ’s
political class. However, the Hartz reformsbetween 2003 and 2005 represented the high-
est peak of the neoliberal wave in Germanyrather than a stable neoliberal hegemony. Thereforms triggered a dramatic backlash —the
largest anti-government street movement
since the uni ﬁcation of Germany in 1990.
Post-Hartz reform, the basis of the German
welfare state model, namely status protection
of skilled workers in a system of social insur-ance, largely disappeared.
Instead, the German welfare state became
based on a much more limited concept ofsocial protection associated with liberalrather than Bismarckian or social democratic
welfare policies. The dramatic cuts in social
security coverage, expansion of means-testing principles in unemployment insur-
ance, pension retrenchment and deregulated
labour markets all resulted in growingsocial inequality and a massive decline of
satisfaction with the political system. By
retrenching the welfare state, the SPD lead-ers effectively demoralised their own elec-
torate. SPD voters were on average more
likely to rely on welfare state policies thanthe economically better-off electorate of theCDU/CSU. From the CDU ’s political point
of view, letting the electoral competitors of
the SPD volunteer for the electoral costs ofwelfare retrenchment was of course the
optimal outcome.
Yet this relative protection of the CDU/
CSU from electoral decline came to an end
in the autumn of 2015. In early September,
Chancellor Merkel took her lonely executivedecision, without consulting with the Ger-
man parliament or fellow EU member coun-
tries, to open Germany ’s borders to refugees
and migrants who had entered the EU viathe Balkan route —often from Turkey —and
had assembled in the Hungarian capital of
Budapest. Initially, it was assumed that mostof the refugees and migrants were of Syrian
origin ﬂeeing the war, and Merkel ’s‘human-
itarian ’decision received extensive support
from civil society representatives and the
media. However, public attitudes started to
shift following large-scale sexual assaults onwomen in the German city of Cologne andother places on New Year ’s Eve 2016, in
which most perpetrators turned out to be
recent arrivals. Following these and othercrime incidents, a massive backlash occurred
that is still ongoing.
288 J €OR G MICHAEL DOSTAL
The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2 ©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019
Crucially, the reason for the deep split in
public attitudes with regard to refugees andmigrants goes beyond simple impressionmanagement. In fact, the German public has
never engaged in an open debate of migra-
tion-related issues. Until the end of the twen-tieth century, the Christian Democrats based
some of their electoral appeal on the state-
ment that ‘Germany is not a country of
immigration ’. Historically, Germans used to
subscribe to a concept of ethnic nationalism,
which differs from notions of civic or repub-lican nationalism along the lines of the US orFrench model. However, Germany has since
the 1990s increasingly turned into a multi-
ethnic society. There have been major migra-tion waves from Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union to Germany —in addi-
tion to earlier cohorts of migrants from Tur-key and other southern countries. The share
of people in Germany with a ‘migration
background ’is now around one quarter of
the resident population. Some of them hold
dual citizenship —they were granted German
citizenship without resigning their originalone—while others do not. Crucially, younger
age cohorts among the German resident pop-
ulation include the by far highest migrant
(and Muslim-migrant) shares.
Thus, Merkel ’s post-2015 refugee and
migration policies clashed with long-standing
cultural values and German anxieties, includ-ing the observation that many German cities
have turned from predominantly ethnic Ger-
man into ethnically segregated cities over thelast generation or so. Ultimately, a combina-
tion of long-term and short-term factors, espe-
cially Merkel ’s failure to communicate clearly
with the German public over her migrationpolicies, meant that con ﬁdence in Merkel ’s
leadership was in the eyes of many observers
damaged beyond repair. Her near-completeisolation on the issue in the EU context —Ger-
many ’s decision was largely resented by
neighbouring EU countries —further under-
scored the poor impression. Ultimately, the
EU-Turkey agreement with Turkish President
Recep Tayyip Erdo /C21gan largely closed off
access to the ‘Balkan route ’, thus limiting
the further arrival of migrants in Germany.
The agreement also included outsourcing
the protection of parts of the EU ’s external
border to Turkey, in exchange for ﬁnancial
contributions.Merkel ’s rapid domestic decline
since 2015
Merkel ’s decision to allow the free entry of
refugees and migrants into Germany on 3
September 2015 was from the beginning
highly contested. Only three days later, thethen CSU party chairman and current Ger-man interior minister Horst Seehofer criti-
cised the action, commenting that ‘Merkel ’s
border opening is a major mistake that willkeep us busy for a long time ’and that ‘we
can only avoid a democratically legitimated
right wing if we take up worries and fearsin the population ’.
5Such anxieties prepared
the stage for the subsequent decline in Mer-
kel’s standing and popularity. Her initial
political explanation was that Germanyopened its borders to grant shelter to refu-
gees from the Syrian war and from other
war zones in a ‘humanitarian gesture ’. What
was surprising about this claim was that
Germany and the other EU countries had for
a long period failed to ﬁnance humanitarian
assistance for those Syrians who had left
their country for neighbouring states in the
Middle East and in Turkey. (The UN reliefeffort had been underfunded and continues
to be underfunded today.)
Following the quick growth in the number
of refugees and migrants entering Germany,a second explanation gained currency,
namely Germans were helping others in
order to prepare their own long-term eco-nomic prosperity. This account stressed that
many of the refugees were ‘doctors and
nurses ’who, following their social integra-
tion into German society, would soon con-
tribute to the economic prosperity of their
host society. Some enthusiasts started to referto the newcomers as ‘the new Germans ’.
Looking back, neither of these initial
explanations for Merkel ’s policy-making
could be con ﬁrmed. Among the around one
million asylum seekers entering Germany
during the open border episode between
September 2015 and March 2016, around 70per cent were young people, under the age
of thirty, and around two-thirds were male.
During 2016 and 2017, more than 1.2 millionasylum requests were received by the Ger-
man authorities, which included additional
people who had entered the country beforeand after the open border episode or had
CANGERMAN CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY REINVENT ITSELF ? 289
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019 The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2
travelled on other routes to reach Germany.
Less than a third of the people entering orig-inated from Syria, while the remainder origi-nated from a large number of African and
Asian countries. Around half of the new-
comers did not carry any identity papersand subsequent practical experience sug-
gested that most of them would rely on the
German welfare state for a long period oftime.
Many critics of Merkel ’s course suggested
that she had opened the gates for chaoticmass migration, which in effect privilegedthe most robust migrants and those paying
smugglers to enter the EU. Critics within the
CDU pointed out that the German state hadsimply lost control and that the most basic
administrative procedures —such as keeping
track of the number of new arrivals —were
no longer being followed.
6In the smart
phone era, refugees and migrants could react
in real time to changes in the state ’s policy
and administration, while the state could not
overcome the limitations of an analogue and
slow administrative process.
Refugee and migrant-related problems still
hold the highest salience of any political
issue in Germany. Longitudinal opinion
polls show that the topic ‘foreigners/integra-
tion/refugees ’has been considered the most
signiﬁcant issue ever since September 2014
by a plurality and sometimes a majority ofrespondents. For most of the time, the issue
was considered more signi ﬁcant than four
other topics (unemployment, economicissues, education and pensions) combined.
Between August 2015 and February 2016,
more than 80 per cent of people consideredthe topic the most important issue, while theﬁgure declined below 50 per cent in April
2017. Signi ﬁcantly, numbers quickly climbed
back up again between June and August2018 when Merkel ’s government signed the
‘UN Global Compact for Migration ’thereby
triggering a new round of domestic debatesand criticism. Other longitudinal opinion
polls suggest that the German public has
been evenly divided on whether Merkel wasdoing a good or a bad job concerning refu-gees and migration. Since October 2017,
however, a majority thought that she was
doing a bad job.
7Thus, the topic ’s salience
continues to ﬁrmly dominate Germany ’s
political agenda.The CDU responds to Merkel ’s
decline in popularity
Many observers of Merkel ’s conduct since
2015 have criticised that she failed to com-
municate her policies in a transparent man-
ner. A typical voice in this respect was theGerman singer Herbert Gr €onemeyer stating
that ‘I would hold against her that she sim-
ply does not communicate ’.
8Some CDU par-
liamentarians also felt that Merkel hadstopped interactions with sections of the
party, disagreeing with her handling of the
crisis. To be fair, Merkel faced a Catch 22 sit-
uation. Especially in the former East Ger-
many, her decline in popularity was so
dramatic that attempts to communicate withcitizens became exercises in ridicule. In onetypical instance, Merkel attended a meeting
in the city of Chemnitz following the murder
of a German citizen by migrants. Her intro-ductory remark that ‘I know that my pres-
ence is a provocation for some of you ’
triggered the response: ‘When do you
resign? ’
Since September 2015, the CDU has expe-
rienced dramatic defeats in all regional elec-tions and the 2017 federal election with only
two exceptions (Saarland and North-Rhine
Westphalia). The rightist AfD managed toenter each of Germany ’s sixteen regional
parliaments, gaining around a quarter of
their support from former CDU/CSU voters,
while also collecting many votes from formernon-voters and from former Left Party sup-
porters, particularly in the former East Ger-
many. Following another dramatic electoraldefeat in the regional state of Hesse in Octo-
ber 2018 (the vote share of the CDU declined
from 38.3 per cent to 27 per cent), Merkelannounced her decision to resign as CDUparty leader and, more crucially, made it
known that her current term as chancellor
would be her last. Thus, she will retire aschancellor in 2021 at the latest —even this
tenure is only secure if the current coalition
government manages to stay in of ﬁce until
then.
Merkel ’s decision re ﬂected her loss of
authority in the party. Crucially, the unprece-dented lengthy negotiations following the
2017 federal elections on forming a new
coalition government —ﬁrst with Greens and
Liberals for three months, ending in failure;
290 J €OR G MICHAEL DOSTAL
The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2 ©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019
then with the SPD to agree yet another grand
coalition for lack of any alternative option —
made Merkel look weak as a national leader.Critics observed that ‘the defence of power
by means of electoral success stands above
the internal con ﬂict [within the CDU] over
concepts and policy content ’and that the
peaceful coexistence between mid-level party
bodies and the leadership ends ‘as soon as
leading representatives can no longer credi-
bly represent the promise to successfully
defend power ’.
9
In February 2018, Merkel still tried to lead
the renewal of her party when she pushed to
install Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer as the
new secretary general of the CDU. Afterregaining the chancellorship in March 2018
—traditionally the major source of authority
within the CDU when in government —she
nevertheless suffered further decline of her
authority in party circles. Competing power
centres in the CDU, such as the parliamen-tary group in the federal parliament, the
CDU regional prime ministers, and internal
party associations such as the employeeassociation (CDA), the economic council(Wirtschaftsrat ) and the mid-sized business
association (MIT), started to display more
autonomy from the chancellor.
In this context, a new round of internal
conﬂict within and between the two Chris-
tian Democratic parties (the CDU and theCSU) concerning the unilateral rejection of
migrants at Germany ’s borders in June 2018
was particularly damaging. This con ﬂict was
theﬁnal call on CDU party bodies to act in
order to defend future electoral prospects. In
September 2018, CDU federal parliamentari-ans unexpectedly rejected Merkel ’s candidate
Volker Kauder as parliamentary leader in
favour of Ralph Brinkhaus, a CDU MP rep-
resenting moderate Merkel critics. The dra-matic election defeat of the CDU in the
Hesse regional elections in the same month
meant that Merkel now faced decisive pres-sure to ‘voluntarily ’resign her position as
party leader.
The future of the CDU: three
candidates, three scenarios
Replacing Merkel as CDU leader was an
effort to stop the party ’s electoral decline. Itserved as an important intermediate step to
prepare the post-Merkel period once sheleaves the chancellorship at the end of hercurrent term in 2021, or at an earlier point.
Within the CDU party hierarchy, her succes-
sor as party leader enjoys important agenda-setting powers. Crucially, there exists a
convention in the CDU by which the party
leader has the ﬁrst right to suggest the
party ’s candidate for chancellor (self-nomina-
tion included). The three candidates compet-
ing for Merkel ’s position as party leader
at a party conference in December 2018were Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Friedrich
Merz and Jens Spahn.
The three candidates were associated with
different wings and tendencies within the
CDU. Kramp-Karrenbauer, an economic cen-
trist with somewhat conservative social lean-ings, was most closely associated with
Merkel and considered to be her preferred
candidate. Merz was on the contrary Mer-kel’sb^ete noire in the sense that he had com-
peted with her for dominant in ﬂuence in the
party in the early 2000s. Back then, he hadgained a reputation as a neoliberal puristand advocate of large-scale deregulation of
the German economic model. In 2002, Mer-
kel made him leave his position as CDU lea-der in the federal parliament in order to
allow her to take over his position. His unex-
pected return to become a candidate for theCDU leadership in 2018 made him the
immediate favourite of CDU-associated busi-
ness circles. In contrast to Merz, Spahn asGermany ’s current health minister could be
described as a more ﬂexible representative of
the conservative wing. He is sometimes asso-ciated with the expansion of welfare stateactivities in Germany ’s rapidly aging society.
By the political standards of the CDU, he
was clearly the most radical choice in termsof a political renewal of the party. Since each
of the three candidates stands for a particu-
lar vision of the future of Germany ’s Chris-
tian Democrats, it is worth brie ﬂy portraying
them in turn.
Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer
Kramp-Karrenbauer, age ﬁfty-six, originates
from Germany ’s federal state of Saarland,
the smallest non-city state with a population
of less than 1 million people. After studying
CANGERMAN CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY REINVENT ITSELF ? 291
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019 The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2
political and administrative sciences, she has
spent almost all her life as a professionalpolitician acting as a big ﬁsh in the small
pond of regional Saarland politics. She only
started to gain a national pro ﬁle because of
her association with Merkel in recent yearsand her subsequent election as CDU general
secretary during a party conference in Febru-
ary 2018. Kramp-Karrenbauer ﬁrst entered
the Saarland parliament in 1999 and subse-
quently acted as minister with various port-
folios between 2000 and 2011.
10Between
2011 and February 2018, she was the regio-nal prime minister ( Ministerpr €asident ) of the
Saarland.
During her political career, she led three
Saarland coalition governments, ﬁrst brie ﬂy
with Greens and Liberals between 2011 and
2012, before switching to a grand coalitionwith the SPD that was twice re-elected in
2012 and 2017. Crucially, Kramp-Karren-
bauer ’s regional grand coalition differed
from Merkel ’s grand coalition at the federal
level in the sense that the CDU maintained
high levels of support, receiving 40 per centof the votes in 2017, gaining 5 per cent,which amounted to a singular success in an
otherwise depressing recent CDU election
record. A second contrast to Merkel ’s style
of governing was that the Saar-SPD survived
the collaboration with the CDU in good
health receiving 30 per cent of the votes in2017. Overall, Kramp-Karrenbauer ’s policy
of compromise and collaboration with other
political parties derived from the politicalculture of the post-industrial Saar region in
which strong state leadership was required
to restructure the economy from an earlierdependency on coal mining and the steelindustry.
Over the years, Kramp-Karrenbauer
became associated with the social wing ofthe CDU with regard to economic policies.
In Germany ’s second federal parliamentary
branch of the regions ( Bundesrat ), she sup-
ported as Saar prime minister in 2012 and
2013 SPD plans for a ﬁxed quota of women
on supervisory management boards andSPD and Green Party suggestions to intro-duce a statutory minimum wage and higher
taxes on high income earners. On socio-
cultural issues, Kramp-Karrenbauer voicedin 2015 her opposition to the legal equalisa-
tion of homosexual with heterosexualmarriage, a measure that was enacted in
Germany in 2017. As a representative of thesocially conservative wing of her party,Kramp-Karrenbauer stresses that she stands
by the social ideal of traditional families
(‘the traditional constellation of father,
mother and their biological children ’) and of
associated tax and welfare policies.
11
Friedrich Merz
Merz, age sixty-three, differed from the other
two candidates for the position of CDU lea-der in the sense that his career as a profes-
sional politician appeared to have already
ended for good in 2009 when he left the fed-eral parliament for a new career as a busi-
ness lawyer. After studying law, Merz had a
parliamentary career —ﬁrst in the European
Parliament, between 1989 and 1994, and
then, between 1994 and 2009, in Germany ’s
federal parliament. Throughout his politicallife, Merz was almost exclusively associatedwith business interests, acting as the leading
advocate of the CDU ’s neoliberal turn. In the
early 2000s he gained country-wide fame forhis proposal to simplify radically the Ger-
man tax system. His plan is still remembered
as the ‘beer mat ’style of tax declaration, but
left no subsequent political impact. When
Merkel became chancellor in 2005, Merz was
not offered a ministerial appointment. Subse-quently, he shifted his portfolio of activities
toward the business sector becoming ﬁrst a
lawyer with an international law ﬁrm in
2005 and then, in 2009, the chairman of theAtlantik-Br €ucke, Germany ’s most senior
transatlantic network in which politicians
and company executives rub shoulders withequivalent US leaders. In February 2016,
Merz became one of three supervisory board
chairmen of BlackRock Germany, the biggestUS investment fund with many investments
in German-based major corporations.
One of the consistencies of Merz ’political
life was his habit to act as a contrarian with
a poor sense of timing. His strong self-
conﬁdence as one of Germany ’s leading
pro-business representatives resulted in hispublication, in 2008, of a monograph titled
Let us Dare more Capitalism . The book
restated principles of German-style ordolib-eralism, suggesting that capitalism could
gain more public support by turning
292 J €OR G MICHAEL DOSTAL
The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2 ©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019
employees into stock market investors and
shareholders in their own enterprise in orderto‘overcome class differences that have only
been kept alive arti ﬁcially for a long time ’.
12
However, his book was remarkably silent
about the origins of the then ongoing globalﬁnancial crisis, notably insuf ﬁcient public
regulation of the banking sector. He there-
fore failed to catch the public mood at thetime.
His unexpected return into politics in
2018, campaigning to become Merkel ’s
replacement as CDU party leader, triggeredan initial wave of goodwill, particularly
within his own party. Friendly media cover-
age described him as the ‘James Dean of
German politics ’who ‘died early enough to
become a hero ’(that is, had not been
involved with Merkel ’s government).
13How-
ever, he once again failed to reach out to sec-
tors of the CDU beyond the market-liberal
wing. While promising to regain half of thevoters of the rightist AfD, he did not make
explicit how he intended to regain these vot-
ers beyond being critical of Merkel ’s refugee
and migration policies. His only other nota-ble policy suggestion was introducing a tax-
free allowance for private stock market
investments.
As head of BlackRock Germany and an
income millionaire, he involuntarily added
to the impression that he was out of touchby claiming in an interview with a tabloid
newspaper to belong to the ‘upper middle
class ’rather than the ‘small very rich and
very wealthy upper class ’.
14Subsequently,
some commentators took great pleasure in
pointing out to him that income millionaireswere statistically not part of Germany ’s
‘middle class ’. In summary, Merz failed to
reinvent himself as a politician able to reach
out to the general public.
Jens Spahn
As the youngest candidate by far, Spahn, at
thirty-eight, was from the beginning consid-
ered to be without any realistic prospect ofwinning the contest. After joining the CDU
atﬁfteen, he became the youngest directly
elected member of Germany ’s federal parlia-
ment at age twenty-two in 2002, and startedto focus on health policies. His subsequentrapid political career included spells as lea-
der of the CDU ’s working group on health
between 2009 and 2015 and as one of thedeputy leaders of the CDU/CSU parliamen-
tary group in 2013. He was then appointed
as a parliamentary state secretary in the min-istry of economics in 2015. In March 2018,
Chancellor Merkel appointed him as Ger-
many ’s minister of health. His short track
record in this role suggests that he plans to
gain a reputation as a mediator who can
deliver reforms based on consensus build-ing.
15In this respect, Spahn differs from his
fellow conservative Merz.
Before and during his campaign to become
the new CDU leader, Spahn was the stron-gest critic of Merkel ’s refugee and migration
policies. He repeatedly voiced concern about
the illiberal attitudes of Muslim migrants inGermany, describing migration as ‘the ele-
phant in the room ’and criticising those
who evaded discussing the issues and takingdifﬁcult decisions.
16
The decision about who would succeed
Merkel as party leader was taken at a partyconference in early December 2018. Spahnhad failed to attract much attention for his
candidacy since the media overwhelmingly
framed the contest as a two-horse racebetween Kramp-Karrenbauer and Merz.
Kramp-Karrenbauer won the contest to
become the new CDU party leader in thesecond round with around 52 per cent of
the party delegates ’vote, narrowly beating
Merz with around 48 per cent support.Spahn as the third candidate achieved
around 15 per cent in the ﬁrst round and
was dropped from the second ballot. Hisvoters evenly split up between the tworemaining candidates.
Conclusion: can German Christian
democracy reinvent itself?
There are two levels of analysis of the CDU ’s
behaviour in recent times: the tactical and
the strategic level. Looking at short-term fac-tors, the CDU has in recent months managed
to organise a textbook power transition
away from Merkel to Kramp-Karrenbauer.By separating Merkel ’s leadership of the
government as chancellor from the party
leadership and by offering the CDU
CANGERMAN CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY REINVENT ITSELF ? 293
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019 The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2
membership a choice between three candi-
dates with very different visions for theparty ’s future, the party management is now
prepared for the time after Merkel.
There can be no reasonable doubt that
Kramp-Karrenbauer is the most promisingchoice for the CDU ’s immediate future. Her
political pro ﬁle is much broader than that of
her two contenders —the unreconstructed
neoliberal Merz who had left frontbench poli-
tics for more than a decade and failed to
expand his appeal beyond pro-business cir-cles, and the more conservative Spahn whohad campaigned on opposing Merkel ’s refu-
gee and migration policies, that is, the most
painful subject that the party wished to leavebehind. As one observer has argued, the
choice of Kramp-Karrenbauer means that ‘the
planned neoliberal restructuring ( Umcodier-
ung) of the CDU by Merz was avoided, and
the path of liberal modernisation will be
further followed ’.
17Thus, a narrow majority
of CDU delegates voted for the candidate that
offered the relatively best prospects to
maintain the CDU as a broad politicalcoalition.
From a strategic point of view, however,
the future of the CDU remains in doubt. In
recent years, there has been a dramaticincrease in electoral volatility. The CDU as
the self-declared ‘party of the centre ’faces
the problem that the centre of society isincreasingly dif ﬁcult to de ﬁne: ‘The more the
bourgeoisie and bourgeois behaviour disap-
pear as social phenomena, the less powerfulcentrist strategies of political parties
appear ’.
18To be clear, the increasing elec-
toral volatility is due to the decline of socialintegration in German society. One of themajor trends of twenty- ﬁrst century Ger-
many has been the growing split between
winners and losers of modernisation. In thecontext of a fragmented centre, petty bour-
geois milieus believe that their future social
standing is threatened. Crucially, the welfareretrenchment of 2003 to 2005 (the ‘Hartz
reforms ’) produced a ﬁrst dealignment of a
cohort of petty bourgeois and blue collarvoters from the SPD and, less visibly, theCDU/CSU. Some of these voters have re-
entered the electoral process in 2017 by vot-
ing for the AfD. In doing so, they were nowjoined by a second dealignment: many for-
mer CDU/CSU and SPD voters —and in EastGermany former Left Party supporters —
switched to the AfD to voice their disagree-ment with Merkel ’s refugee and migration
policies, claiming that their own social inter-
ests had been ignored for too long.
It is signi ﬁcant to underline the close rela-
tionship between the ‘ﬁrst’(post-2005) and
the ‘second ’(post-2015) dealignment of for-
mer centrist voters from the centre-left andthe centre-right, respectively. These two elec-
toral shifts away from the centre are related
by the feeling that the future holds littlehope for those not able to compete in arapidly changing socio-cultural and socio-
economic environment with little promise of
welfare and security by the state. One Frenchobserver puts it as follows: ‘The population
would not feel as threatened by the refugees
if the welfare state would not have beenretrenched. It is often said that people vote
for the AfD because they fear for their own
support by the welfare state. That one caneasily comprehend; after all their social
safety net was indeed massively cut down,
although not because of the refugees butlong beforehand by [SPD chancellor] Ger-hard Schr €oder ’.
19
How is Kramp-Karrenbauer going to repo-
sition the CDU in a period of growing socialinsecurity? In terms of addressing the vari-
ous urgent issues —refugees and migration,
social integration, economic policy-making —
she needs to keep the party united and able
to act. Her ﬁrst high-pro ﬁle activity as party
leader was organising a workshop in earlyFebruary 2019 with experts and practitioners,
and without Merkel in attendance, to draw
lessons from the post-2015 refugee andmigration policies. During this meeting,Kramp-Karrenbauer acted as moderator
inviting others to voice grievances and pre-
sent ideas on how to rebuild political trust.Nevertheless, this discussion converged on
what had already been debated for years:
cuts in welfare payments for migrants, morerepatriation of failed asylum seekers and
efforts to strengthen border security and
cooperation between EU countries. None ofthis is going to produce quick results or sat-isfy critics of Merkel ’s track record.
As for the related issue of social integra-
tion, it is unclear how Kramp-Karrenbauerintends to tackle the root causes of social cri-
sis, namely Germany ’s dualistic labour
294 J €OR G MICHAEL DOSTAL
The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2 ©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019
market with many categories of working
poor, and the decline of trust in welfare stateinstitutions. Here, the CDU ’s liberal wing
argues for a zero-sum choice between wel-
fare policies and tax cuts, favouring the lat-
ter. Kramp-Karrenbauer has alreadysignalled that she is willing to support CDU
liberals in demands to abolish the so-called
‘solidarity surcharge ’(Solidarit €atszuschlag ), a
tax that was initially introduced after Ger-
many ’s uni ﬁcation in 1990. The coalition
agreement between CDU/CSU and SPD ofMarch 2018 stated that this tax will be abol-ished for the lower 90 per cent of income
earners during the current government. The
CDU now demands that it should also beabolished for the top earners, which would
satisfy liberals but questions Kramp-Karren-
bauer ’s commitment to the social wing of
her party.
20In short, she is subject to strong
and contradictory demands.
It is too early to tell whether Kramp-
Karrenbauer can protect and/or reinvent the
CDU as a political coalition. The rapid rise
of the AfD as a party combining nationalconservative cadres, often with roots in thepre-Merkel CDU, supported by uprooted
and disappointed voters from across the
political spectrum has demonstrated thatGermany ’s party system is now in ﬂux.
From the point of view of the CDU after
Merkel, how to deal with the dif ﬁcult rela-
tionship between social and cultural integra-
tion under conditions of a structurally
weakened state after a generation of deregu-lation and privatisation remains an open
question.
Notes
All German sources translated by the author.
1 For historical reasons, Germany ’s Christian
Democrats are nominally organised into twoseparate parties, namely the CDU in ﬁfteen of
sixteen German federal states and the Christian
Social Union (CSU) in the state of Bavaria. Inthe German federal parliament, the two partieshave always formed a joint parliamentary
group ( Fraktionsgemeinschaft ). The two parties
have twice, in 1976 and in June 2018, consid-ered splitting up their joint parliamentarygroup. The current article discusses the party
case of the CDU but refers to the CDU/CSU
when reference is made to the joint parliamen-tary group in the federal parliament. In termsof managing party affairs, CDU and CSU
members vote in two separate elections for
two different party leaders, and only the for-mer case is discussed here.
2A . B l €atte, ‘Reduzierter Parteienwettbewerb
durch kalkulierte Demobilisierung: Bestim-mungsgr €unde des Wahlverhaltens im Bun-
destagswahlkampf 2009 ’, in K.-R. Korte, Die
Bundestagswahl 2009. Analysen der Wahl-, Par-
teien-, Kommunikations- und Regierungsforschung ,
Wiesbaden, VS Verlag, 2010, pp. 273 –97; M. H.
Spreng, ‘Der Wahlkampfvermeidungswahlka-
mpf. Eine Analyse der CDU-Wahlstrategie
2009 ’,Forschungsjournal Neue Soziale Bewegun-
gen, vol. 23, no. 1, 2010, pp. 52 –4.
3 O. Nachtwey, ‘It doesn ’t matter who replaces
Merkel. Germany is broken ’,New York Times ,
7 December 2018.
4A . S c h €afer, Der Verlust politischer Gleichheit.
Warum die sinkende Wahlbeteiligung der Demokratie
schadet , Frankfurt, Campus, 2015; T. Schwu-
chow, interview with M. Micus, ‘Die Aktivier-
ung der Nichtw €ahler durch die AfD ’,1 6
September 2016; http://www.demokratie-goe
ttingen.de/blog/aktivierung_nichtwaehler (ac-cessed 18 February 2019).
5 H. Seehofer, CSU party conference speech,
6 September 2015, quoted in P. M €uller, Der
Machtkampf. Seehofer und die Zukunft der CSU ,
Stuttgart, Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 2016,
p. 117.
6 C. Linnemann, Die machen eh, was sie wollen.
Wut, Frust, Unbehagen —Politik muss besser wer-
den, Freiburg, Herder, 2017, p. 82.
7 Forschungsgruppe Wahlen: Politbarometer,
‘Wichtige Probleme in Deutschland ’and ‘Poli-
tik-Archiv ’
; https://www.forschungsgruppe.
de/Umfragen/Politbarometer/Langzeitentwick
lung_-_Themen_im_Ueberblick/Politik_-_Archiv/
#Asylpol (accessed 18 February 2019).
8‘Gr€onemeyer kritisiert Merkel: “Sie kommu-
niziert einfach nicht ”’,Die Welt , 17 October
2018.
9O .D ’Antonio, C. Werwath, ‘Die CDU: Inner-
parteiliche Willensbildung zwischen Gremien-
arbeit und Grauzone ’, in K.-R. Korte, J. Treibel,
eds., ‘Wie entscheiden Parteien? Prozesse
innerparteilicher Willensbildung in Deutsch-land ’,Zeitschrift f €ur Politikwissenschaft , Sonder-
band, Baden-Baden, Nomos, 2012, pp. 35 –61
(54).
10 If not otherwise indicated, factual information
about the three candidates derives from the
online database ‘Munzinger Internationales
Biographisches Archiv ’; https://www.munzing
er.de/search/query?query.id=query-00 (access-
ed 18 February 2019).
11 K. Dunz, E. Quadbeck, Ich kann, ich will und
ich werde. Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, die
CANGERMAN CHRISTIAN DEMOCRACY REINVENT ITSELF ? 295
©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019 The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2
CDU und die Macht , Berlin, Propyl €aen, 2018,
p. 158.
12 F. Merz, Mehr Kapitalismus wagen. Wege zu einer
gerechten Gesellschaft , Munich, Piper, 2008,
pp. 99, 117.
13 E. Lose, ‘Friedrich Merz: Dieser Kandidat passt
nicht auf einen Bierdeckel ’,Frankfurter Allge-
meine Zeitung , 31 October 2018.
14 Quoted in E. Lohse, ‘Million €ar der Mittelschicht:
Ist Merz ein Kandidat von gestern? ’,Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung , 15 November 2018.
15 M. Br €ocker, Jens Spahn: Die Biographie , Frei-
burg, Herder, 2018, pp. 240, 257.
16 J. Spahn, ‘Weiter ungeordnete, €uberwiegend
m€annliche Zuwanderung ’,Frankfurter Allge-
meine Zeitung , 1 November 2018.17 A. v. Lucke, ‘Frauen an der Macht: Die CDU
nach Merkel ’,Bl€atter f €ur deutsche und interna-
tionale Politik , vol. 64, no. 1, 2019, pp. 5 –8 (6).
18 F. Walter, C. Werwath, O. D ’Antonio, Die
CDU. Entstehung und Verfall christdemokratischer
Geschlossenheit , Baden-Baden, Nomos, 2011, p.
201.
19 D. Eribon, quoted in D. Binswanger, ‘Die
Herrschenden haben Angst —und das ist wun-
dervoll ’,Republik , 12 January 2019; https://
www.republik.ch/2019/01/12/die-herrschenden-haben-angst-und-das-ist-wundervoll (accessed 18
February 2019).
20 M. Schieritz, ‘Solidarit €atszuschlag: Milliarden
f€ur Topverdiener ’,Die Zeit , 19 December
2018.
296 J €OR G MICHAEL DOSTAL
The Political Quarterly , Vol. 90, No. 2 ©The Author 2019. The Political Quarterly ©The Political Quarterly Publishing Co. Ltd. 2019